How do you tell the story of an entire
country over more than a century through
its women? It is an epic undertaking,
but it's what journalist Julia Yoffy has
set out to do in a new book called
Motherland. It's about Russian women,
prominent ones, those who were prominent
but were then forgotten, and those who
have been entirely unsung. And it
interested me because it's not only
about the sweep of history, though she
looks at the span of the whole 20th
century. It also comes right up to the
present day and the women of Putin's
Russia, including those battling to
bring their men home from fighting in
Ukraine. So, here is that conversation
recorded in Washington, DC.
Julia Yoffy, congratulations on writing
Motherland. It's an immense work because
you're telling the story of modern
Russia through its women, including the
women of your family because Russia is
where you were born in the 80s in the
time before glass.
>> Yeah. I actually was born in a country
that no longer exists in many senses of
the word. Uh I was born in the Soviet
Union and no longer does that country
not exist but also the emancipatory
experiment it embarked on in 1917
uh visav its women also evaporated. And
before we get to the stories within the
book, I'm keen to understand more of
your own story because you do weave
between the big history of Russia and
individual stories. When you were living
in Russia for those first seven years of
your life, what do you remember of of
that time?
>> There weren't uh the little things that
I really liked that were ultra specific.
You know how kids like very specific
things. So there was never orange gum. I
really liked orange gum. I had it once
and then I never saw it again. This was
the era of deficits and empty
storeshelves. Uh there were these uh
gingerbread cookies biryani and they
came in a mint flavor that I must have
had once or twice and then they
disappeared. I remember a lot of time
with spent with my grandmother, my
maternal grandmother who was a
cardiologist and quite a formidable
woman and she lived four floors down
from us. Um, and I was her Cinderella
and she was my prince. And I would go
down on the evenings she was home. She
had a very vibrant social life. On the
evenings she was home, I would saunter
down to her apartment and we would read
and write stories. I'm going to pick out
a few stories of individual women from
the book. And I'm conscious as I do so
that this is a very limited choice of
the massive tapestry that you that you
have. But to go back to the foundations
of Soviet Russia to 1917 and the and the
revolution, tell us about Alexandra
Colintai who is at Lenin's side and is
the one who lays the framework for women
in Soviet Russia and the way that they
do have an equality that is unusual for
that time.
>> Yeah. So the Bolsheviks were unusual in
that while all the revolutionary parties
were grappling grappling with what at
the time in the late 19th century was
called the woman question, the Boleviks
were by far the most egalitarian of all
the underground opposition parties to
the Tsar.
And
while Karl Marx and most of the kind of
the old guard the Marxist founder
founding fathers
kind of yada yada the part of how
communism and socialism was to liberate
women specifically Alexander Colintai
really fleshed out these ideas about
what would be needed for women to be
truly emancipated for them to be truly
equal to men in a future
utopian egalitarian
socialist society and when she is named
the commasaur for people's social
welfare
>> which is a cabinet position
>> yes she was the first female cabinet
minister and in 1918 excuse me in 1918
she instituted some incredibly radical
reforms
uh women are given the right to well all
Soviets are given the right to civil
divorce no fault divorce
Women get paid maternity leave in 1918,
access to free higher education, um
child support that they can claim even
from a man who is not their husband,
even for a child that is born out of
wedlock. Um
regulations on maternity care, both
medical and in terms of um the
facilities. In 1920, the Soviet Union
legalizes abortion and makes it free and
relatively safe for Soviet women. And
[clears throat] yet she bristled. She
would have bristled if we called her a
feminist.
>> Really,
>> they were very anti-feminist because
they were socialists. For socialists,
class comes above everything, right?
Everything is subsumed to class. So
anything that breaks people out by
further by gender, nationality, religion
is seen as bourgeoa splitterism.
>> You studied Soviet history here in the
US, right? You grew up in the US. We're
speaking here in Washington. Did you
know about her? Is she someone who is
sort of noted properly in Soviet?
>> No.
>> Studying Soviet history, you didn't.
>> No, I didn't know about her.
>> She was written out of the history by
the Bolshvik. She was very quickly
banished. The so uh the boleviks were
radically egalitarian
when they were in the ind when they were
in the underground and the stakes were
quite low and they weren't in charge of
anything. The second they took power
they were like okay the men the men get
the real positions of power and also the
history was written by men and they
don't take these issues seriously as a
rule I think for male historians male
journalists war is important uh
economics you know like numbers big
factories and pipes and guns are
important and this kind of stuff is seen
as soft and not serious And I think I
don't know if that reflects your
experience in the profession, but in my
experience, you very much have to
write about those topics to be taken
seriously. And then you think those are
the only serious topics when writing
about a country. Um, and that is why I
was reluctant to even do a book about
Russian women. I had to be talked into
it because I was like, that's not
serious. I want to bring out another
couple of women from motherland and one
of them is really tragic and painful.
It's Valentina Dorda who was only 13
when she was
>> 16. Yeah.
>> Okay. When 16 when she was first raped
by Stalin's henchman barrier, one of
many girls and
>> uh and women who he abducted and and
assaulted.
How hard was it to uncover a story of
someone like that who was abused and it
affected the rest of her life?
>> Very very very hard because um
so on one hand people knew anecdotally
that this was happening. People even
knew where it was happening. People knew
where Barry lived. They knew what went
on in that house. That he cruised the
streets of Moscow looking for pretty
young girls. that he brought them back
to his mansion and raped them. Uh that
he hunted for Soviet actresses on the
silver screen and if they had husbands,
you know, if they hid behind, you know,
I can't sleep with you because I'm
married, he would take care of that so
they were no longer married.
>> Get rid of the husband.
>> Yeah.
>> And your grandmother told you about
this?
>> Yeah. She pointed out the house to you.
>> She did. She did. Uh but then I found
out my father had heard about it as a
kid. His father had told him. So even
the men knew. But when I went to find
this in the
kind of historical cannon in the west,
it really wasn't written about. It was
usually relegated to a footnote or a
kind of parenthetical as something
salacious and purant and unserious
that it's about sex and so it's not
serious and it's kind of gross and let's
not dig into it. And when I asked
very prominent Soviet his or American
historians of the Soviet Union, they
really they waved me off the topic and
were like, "We don't really know. You
know, it's a he said, she said." What
was the most devastating for me though,
I mean, it was very hard to research. I
I was able to find a collection of
documents from Barry's arrest and secret
trial and execution. women would write
to him on behalf of their fathers, their
husbands, and say, "Can you I know he's
innocent. Can you let me go? Let him
go." And his lieutenants would go and
find out if she if the woman writing was
pretty. And if she was, she'd be called
in on the pretense of Barry helping with
her family's case, only for the, you
know, tragic inevitable to happen.
But the most devastating aspect in
researching this was I
pretty easily found
one of Valentina Drazdoa's boyfriends,
one of her lovers from later in life.
She uh was married again and uh then had
a series of paramors.
And this man told me a lot about her
life and about how broken she was and
how because Barry was shot and killed
and then her second husband who was a
black marketeteer was arrested, shot and
killed, people called her Lala the
coffin as if it were her fault, as if
she was the one bringing bad luck to
these men. He told me that so Barry
eventually impregnated her and she had
the baby at 17. And this man told me
that when Lealia, Lai was her nickname,
when she was in labor, Barry called her
at the hospital and said, "You know,
whatever you want, I'll give you
whatever you want." And because she was
just a child herself, she asked for a
bicycle.
And
this man told me that she died in 2014.
I was still, that means she was alive
when I was living in Moscow. She was
alive when I was traveling back and
forth after I moved back to Washington.
I could have found her. I could have
interviewed her, but I was so busy
writing about Putin and what Putin wants
and what Putin thinks and not thinking
about the quote unquote unserious things
um like women and sexual violence as a
tool of the state that I totally missed
it and
I massively regret it to this day. Is
Motherland part of a response to being
asked so much about one man Putin?
>> God, yeah, absolutely. Yeah. I'm just so
sick of talking about him.
>> On one hand, I get it. He is the
sole decision maker effectively in a
dictatorial state.
But
I know from my own experience that
Russia is bigger and more complex than
that. And even a dictatorship is
multifaceted when you start looking
closely at it. And even a country like
the Soviet Union, which was a
totalitarian dictatorship,
dictator to dictator, excuse me, the
periods were different.
Um,
and I just I on one hand wanted to write
a book where he was a bit player. And
this was one of the reasons I wrote the
book, not the main one, but I the
original impetus for wanting to kind of
take a time out in 2017 when all of
Washington was obsessed with Donald
Trump and his relationship to Vladimir
Putin that I was like, I just never want
to talk about Vladimir Putin again.
>> We're there again though with Trump and
which we may come back to. I hope you'll
forgive me if we come back to that. But
Putin does feature in you you Ludm
Miller Putin his now ex-wife is one of
the is one of the characters. Tell us
about finding this one interview that
she once gave about him. It's quite a
feat that you managed to track it down.
>> So she sat for a number of interviews.
Um when Putin was named interim
president, he had three months to get
elected legit, you know, quote unquote
legitimately. and his spin doctors put
together this campaign memoir in the
American style and she sat for
interviews for that. So that's widely
available.
But then in 2002 there was uh an
authorized biography that came out and
it was supposed to be the first of
several volumes,
excuse me. the that first volume
featured hours of interviews with Ludma,
his first wife.
And
clearly she was resentful and unhappy.
And the resentments had piled up over
the course of their marriage, over the
first two years of their of his
presidency. And the fact that he didn't
even tell her that he was going to
become president. She didn't even find
out when her countrymen did on TV cuz
she didn't even know to turn on the TV
to watch Boris Yeltson hand over hand
over the uh presidency to her husband.
Um
>> and she and she and she pours her heart
out to this interviewer and tells him
all about what a horrible boyfriend
Vladimir Putin was, what a terrible
fiance he was, what an even worse
husband he was. And after that book is
published, I have no idea what happened
to that author. I can't find him. And I
couldn't find I had seen people refer to
this book, but I could, you know, trying
to find the original source was almost
impossible because the book was out of
print.
And even though you can get any Russian
book pirated 75 different ways online
for free,
this one was nowhere. It had clearly
been purged from the web. I found one
copy on Amazon for about $200 when it
was originally about three I think. And
it was a treasure trove of information
about,
pardon my French, what an Vladimir Putin
was at home. What a tyrant he was at
home before he became a tyrant to the
rest of the world. M
>> let's go to your return to Russia. I
know after immigrating with your
parents, you went back once as a
visitor, but then you returned in 2009
in your own right, and you end up living
back in the same apartment block that
you lived in when you were growing up
with your parents.
>> Yeah, I lived on a foldout couch at my
grandmother's apartment. We had been on
the seventh floor. She was on the third
in what had originally been her
mother-in-law, my great-grandmother's
apartment. and I lived on a foldout
couch in the living room for 3 years and
had a blast. some of the best years of
my life. um watching a Russia that now
in retrospect we know was in a temporary
thaw under Medve when media outlets were
sprouting up and there was this freedom
to
to speak to think and there was a sense
that maybe some of the powers and the
freedoms and the liberties that Putin
had taken away during his first two
terms in office between 2000 and 2008
could be returned free election s free
press, an independent judiciary, a
releasing of political prisoners, and it
was this moment of incredible ferment
and excitement. Um,
>> and people getting rich,
>> but the but the riches are insane. I
mean, I had never seen wealth like this,
not even living in New York, because
Westerners don't flaunt their wealth
quite the same way. And I also noticed
that women
were had changed. They weren't like the
women in my family. It was like we left
20 years beforehand and were this weird
extinct species preserved in amber back
in the US whereas Soviet posts Soviet
women had evolved to be these oligarch
hunters essentially.
>> Do you see parallels to today and the
trad wives? Mhm. Yes, it was. Um,
except the tradife thing here in the US
is much
more intense and kind ofo it has this
kind of homesteader
aspect to it.
uh the women in Russia who wanted to
marry rich and who wanted to stay home
didn't want to have eight kids and cook
all their meals from scratch, you know,
and make their kids cereal from scratch
because, you know, I woke up this
morning and my and my husband was
craving gum, so I decided to make it
from scratch kind of, you know, um I
think people will know which influencer
I'm talking about. They wanted to not
have to cook, to not have to, you know,
to maybe have one kid or two kids, but
they wanted to just live for themselves
and take, you know, uh, get their nails
done and get massages and
>> and how did how did you fit into that?
Because you're a young woman at that
time. You're dating in the 2000s. You
didn't date.
>> Not really. I mean, I was I felt in this
environment, coming from the west,
coming with my parents' ideas about what
it meant to be a woman, you know, in my
family, it was just assumed that you go
to college. When I was just starting out
in in journalism and in media, my
father, who as a Soviet didn't
understand what being a journalist was,
said something to me that only in
retrospect I realized was incredibly
feminist of him without him even
realizing it. He said, "Sure, it's fun
now to be a journalist and have this
bohemian lifestyle, but when you're 30
and you have a family, how are you going
to support them? How are you going to
make money to support them?" The
underlying assumption being that I would
be the main bread winner. And that
didn't even that was just the natural
assumption both for me and for my
sister.
And then add to that western feminism
that was everywhere. I get to Russia and
it's women just want to wear crazy heels
and are made up all the time and are
kind of cosplaying
femininity and are just constantly
hunting for men. That's just what they
wake up thinking about, what they go to
bed thinking about. And in that context,
I felt like
a third asexual gender or like a talking
dog that didn't fit in at all. And I
think Russian men found me bewildering.
Uh
>> do they see you as Russian in that
period? I don't even
>> No, they saw me as very American and as
like uh and as a feminist, which is was
a bad word. Still is a bad word. Um,
I've been told that by a friend who runs
a publishing house in Moscow that they
can't translate my book because feminist
is now essentially a band work and word
and it's in the
>> it's in the subtitle.
uh and western men that was the most
disappointing part is western men who
were highly educated who had gone to the
Harvards and the Stanfords and the
Camidages
uh
went to Russia and were so happy to
throw feminism overboard because they
had these women who were like, "Oh, I'll
just be the traditional
uh very pliant, subservient,
ultra feminine woman for you
and you're in charge and I'll do
anything you say.
>> And they love it.
>> They loved it. Plus, these women look
like supermodels and they loved it. And
then, of course, they would
wake up to realize, I think I'm paying
my girlfriend an allowance, but I'm not
sure. What did your parents make of you
coming back to Russia and immersing
yourself in the study of the Soviet
Union? Because when they immigrated in
1990, they
>> they do it, don't they? Because they
fear that pograms are going to come
again.
>> Yeah. That's why my mother gives or gave
my father the green light is she in 1988
had heard the widespread rumor at the
time that to celebrate the 10,000th
anniversary of Russia becoming Christian
that there would be pgrums and that the
police were handing out names and
addresses of Jews. And um she realized
that even though nothing ultimately
happened that it was believable
and she gave my father the green light
to start the immigration process. But he
had wanted to leave forever. He hated
the system. He hated the
totalitarianism, the lying, the um you
know war is peace, the lies, the truth
kind of um logic twisting.
So when I
went to college, a college they could
not afford as refugees who had only been
in the country for a few years, they
took out massive loans for me to go to
this prestigious university. And I
decide to study Soviet history and I'm
like, "Oh, I just read about Marxis and
Leninism and all the stuff that they had
been forced to learn and hated and
>> and wanted to leave behind
>> and wanted to leave behind." They were
horrified and they couldn't understand
why I was doing it.
>> Moreover, they as my father kept saying,
"This country has no future.
Why are you doing this? You have a
future. Russia doesn't. keep uncoupling
the two.
>> I want to talk about one of the people
that you got to know in that period when
you went back to Moscow in the 2000s.
Can you take those headphones and
have a listen to this voice?
>> All this sacrificed made from my family,
my brother, made by Boris Nimov who was
killed, who was shot in the back uh
close to the Kremlin. a lot of other
people we have a political uh prisoners
hundreds of them all over the Russia and
uh if I will stop it means all these
sacrificed this are useless and they are
not and I do believe in what I'm doing
and I do believe that my alternative is
better for Russia and I'm absolutely
sure that we will succeed and I believe
in victory.
>> That's tough to hear. tough to hear
because it's Alex Nali.
>> Yeah. Sorry.
>> Um
I mean
>> there are tears in your eyes. It's
>> Yeah.
>> Tell me about meeting him for the first
time. What you thought of him then? I
think it was 2011.
>> 2010. Um he was a kind of upand
cominging blogger who was writing about
corruption and the way that the uh
Putinist regime was using state
corporations to funnel
money away from Russian taxpayers to the
pockets of Putin's friends and people
were taking notice of him just because
there was a thriving blogosphere. I
mean, this was a period of relative
freedom, and it was before the FSB had
figured out the internet, period, let
alone how to police it.
So, I thought I would just do a quick
kind of blog post about him for actually
for Bloomberg Business Week. and I met
him for lunch and immediately was like,
"No, this is
it felt like what it must have been like
to meet a young Bill Clinton or a young
Barack Obama."
The force of personality, the force of
conviction
create like he had his own gravitational
pull and it was intoxicating
in a way that he had this charisma and
force of personality that was unlike
anything I had ever seen before. And you
know, I had met Nim Boris Nimsov as well
and many other opposition leaders, but
he had it. He had that thing that um
marquee politicians, global leaders
have. And I remember and I decided to uh
pitch
uh David Remnick about writing a profile
of him. And he was like, "Who is this
guy? I've never heard of him." I was
like, "We need to write about him."
[snorts] He was really extraordinary. I
mean, we had big differences and we
would get into fights sometimes and um
>> I think you told him, didn't you, at one
point you thought one of his
>> his speeches was anti-Semitic. Yeah.
>> The nationalist rhetoric and you told
him that I think elements of this
>> anti tweeted it and then my phone rang
and it was him yelling at me uh and
said, "How dare you say it was
anti-semitic?" I was like, "Because it
was you were talking about Jewish." He
he was uh talking about oligarchs and he
specifically mentioned oligarchs who had
recognizably Jewish names and he said
they were uh drinking the blood of the
Russian people, eating the livers of the
Russian people. Just very kind of um old
school Russian anti-semitic uh imagery.
And he was speaking at a nationalist
march where neo-Nazis were
heavily represented. So, he was very
clearly doing something and I tweeted
about it and he immediately called me up
to argue with me and we were yelling at
each other on the phone. But I still had
a very deep admiration for him um
because of how
I don't know how to put it. He was
curious and he surrounded himself with
smart people who disagreed with him and
his views really did evolve on these on
issues of nationalism and how he saw
migrants from the the Muslim North
Caucuses from Central Asia. And he
I mean he was very imperfect as all
humans are and as all politicians are
and all politicians who aspire to the
presidency of a country but he was an
incredibly brave incredibly charismatic
person and um I think one of the reasons
I teared up is because of the person he
was but also because of he was people's
hope for a better Russia.
And when he was killed,
it felt like the last shred of hope that
any of us had for a better Russia post
Putin went with him. It felt like
the Russia that I was a part of when I
moved back, this young democratic,
vibrant, pro-western
Russia that saw Russia as a
collaborative collaborative member of
the international community. um that is
so different from the Russia that it
became that he was
he was the last living representative of
that and they killed him.
>> The words that we heard were him
speaking to the BBC in 2017 and by the
time that his death was announced in
2024, he'd spent three years in
detention. And the way that he died in
the in that prison in the Arctic Circle,
it it was so tragically in line with so
many deaths in your book, in the goolag,
the the extreme depravity, the senseless
tragedy, the closeness to death, and in
the way that people live. It it feels
like even in death, the way he died is
emblematic of so much more. I think, you
know, in writing this book, I got to the
part where Vladimir Putin in his address
to the his annual address to the Federal
Assembly in 2012
uh essentially says, "I'm no longer
dealing with liberal pro-western
Russians. They came out into the streets
against me and so I'm cutting them out.
They I will just no longer contend with
them. I will crush them." And he uses
this word meaning binds like the
traditionalist,
excuse me, ties that will that bind
Russia have bound Russia throughout the
centuries. Nationalism, the Russian
Orthodox Church,
[clears throat] a patriarchal
traditionalism, one that is quite
violent and macho.
[clears throat]
And uh he talked about shoring up the
institutions that are those that do hold
that have held Russia together over the
centuries. And I realized that one of
the most important one institution was
the penal one that the penal
institutions of [snorts]
Putin's Russia were much like the penal
institutions of Stalin's Russia which
are much like the penal institutions of
Sarist Russia. that if there was one
very important
Russian institution that transmitted the
values of the Russian state over the
centuries across an imperialist vision,
uh an imperial monarchist vision, a
Soviet utopian, a socialist utopian
vision, and today's whatever nationalist
um revantist vision, it's the penal
system. You you write in Motherland that
part of what undoes Navali is the
Ukraine war and in 2022 when the
full-scale invasion happens so many of
his base of educated Russians want want
to leave Russia. Do you think Russia can
sustain this war in Ukraine?
>> It will try as long as possible.
>> Um
>> but economically does it have to
>> they don't care. Uh, I think the
valorization of World War II,
the turning of World War II into a state
religion and a state cult allows
Vladimir Putin to say, "Look, we
defeated Nazism by laying down 27
million Soviet soldiers. Uh, the war
nearly destroyed our country, but we
won.
Right now, Russia has lost maybe a
million men and both to injury and to
death.
Russia can I think the message is that's
so much less than 27 million. That's a
fraction of the cost. We can do that.
And I think what we've seen in Putin's
most recent negotiations with Trump is
that at first he tried to outmaneuver
Trump and say, "Hey, forget about
Ukraine. Let's just normalize a
relationship between Russia and the US
and then you, your family, American
companies can come in and do business in
Russia and just make an absolute
killing.
but he just can't let go of his fixation
on Ukraine and he doesn't care if there
are business oper like he doesn't care
enough about the normalization with the
US to let go of this um Ukrainian
fixation that he has he is willing to I
think sacrifice everything because he
has made this war existential I think he
understands that if Russia loses the war
uh or is seen to lose the war then he is
he is a goner he cannot last on the
throne
>> and are there others who feel like him I
at at the point where he is is it more
likely that he's replaced by someone who
is similar to him who's going to feel
the same way or do you think this is a
personal obsession with this
>> I think it started off as a personal
obsession but now
from everything I've seen, the state has
done so much to indoctrinate the
population and the younger generations
about this war that I worry um that even
if he were to leave power, which I think
will only happen through his death, that
his successors will feel the need to
carry carry it on. And
originally I I had thought of Russian
history foram uh for examples and met
like analoges to this. But now I think a
lot about the US and the Iraq war where
even Democrats like Barack Obama who
felt that George W. Bush's invasion of
Iraq was wrong and criminal and should
never have happened, had to keep
fighting the war even after he won the
presidency as the anti- Bush and as the
anti-war candidate because Americans,
even though they felt that the war was a
mistake, didn't want to lose.
>> I want to ask you about your work today
and Washington and covering Washington
as you do in your day job.
>> How has it been as a journalist? because
we are we're seeing all these different
ways in which the Trump administration
has tried to restrict the press or sue
the press. What's what's your assessment
of what all of it adds up to?
>> I think what it adds up to is that
Donald Trump has been able to do in less
than a year what it took Vladimir Putin
two decades to do in certain cases.
the speed at which he has hollowed out
American institutions,
uh
the courts, the
legislative body,
um
every check and balance imaginable. Uh
the way private industry has bent the
knee rather than risk their profits and
forgetting, by the way, that more than
half the country doesn't like this.
forgetting that they those customers
also have a say
um makes me
really
I don't know how to put it disappointed
in my American compatriots
in all those years that I was reporting
on Putin.
anytime Putin did something restrictive,
authoritarian,
anytime um things got a little hard
economically,
I would be asked to come on TV or to
write a piece and people would say,
"Well, why aren't Russians out in the
streets protesting and overthrowing him?
Can't they see how terrible it is? Can't
they see he's a dictator? Surely young
people, college students hate this,
right? because college students in their
minds are by definition liberal
revolutionaries.
Um
I just want to ask all of them.
Why aren't Americans in the streets all
the time
demanding answers and demanding a
change? Not not appoint not protests on
by appointment and for fun, you know,
with funny posters, but real real
protests. Why aren't we holding our
corporations to account? Uh our Congress
to account. I mean,
Speaker Johnson with Donald Trump's
blessing because he has no real power.
He has said and Donald Trump according
to the reporting in the New York Times,
Donald Trump jokes that he Donald Trump
is the speaker of the US House of
Representatives and the president. Um
he's essentially dissolved parliament. I
mean, if I were a foreign correspondent
here trying to explain this for an
audience back home, that's how I would
write it. And yeah, is this a version of
authoritarian?
>> Absolutely.
>> Absolutely. And the thing is uh for many
of us who know this movie, who have seen
this movie before in Hungary, in Russia,
in China,
uh in Venezuela,
we were leaning on the horn, sounding
the alarm starting in 2015, 2016. You
can see where this is going. And still
people are like, "Oh, no. Surely that
won't happen." Given the way things are
going, I would not be surprised if uh
Mike Johnson, the current speaker of the
house or the future speaker of the
house, refused to seat Democrats who win
seats in the November midterms in 2026.
I would not be surprised if uh after
those midterms, we are effectively a one
party state in the way that Hungary or
Russia are a one party state, even
though other parties still exist on
paper.
um effectively a one party state and
people say that for some reason every
next step and I saw it in Russia too. I
saw my Russian colleagues saying oh well
Putin wouldn't do that. He did A B CDE E
F G and H. Uh but he wouldn't do I and
J. And you're like well why not? And
then he does I and J and they're like
well he wouldn't do M. Right. And it's
um
I think it's time to open our eyes and
see where this is going and stop
pretending that he that somebody who has
gone this far won't go one more step,
two more steps, three more steps.
>> To close, Julia, this is the weekend
interview. These episodes go out into
the world on a Friday. And I wonder if
we can go back in time to your childhood
in still Soviet Russia
>> and your weekends then especially as a
Jewish family the Sabbath in a state
where you know religion is not
>> we didn't know what that was.
>> I wouldn't call myself religious. It's
just I think in part because it's not
something I grew up with and growing up
with parents who hated the Soviet Union
but were still very much creations of
the Soviet Union both in terms of the
militant atheism. Um
definitely left left its mark.
>> And Russian is it do you think in
Russian? Do you dream in Russian? only
uh when I'm in Russia for you know after
about a week I switch
and I haven't been back since just
before the pandemic and I don't know
when I'll ever go back if ever uh when
the war first started or the full-scale
invasion happened. The war started in
2014. Um I would ask everybody I knew
and loved from that place like when do
you think we can go back? When do you
think it will be safe for us to go back?
Um,
and I don't know. I can't imagine it
being safe to go back for a very long
time. I think definitely not while Putin
is alive. And I think Putinism will live
on after him for quite a while. The same
way Stalinism lived on after Stalin for
about 40 more years.
>> And how do you feel thinking that? Do
you miss it? Is it a sense of loss in
you?
>> Massive. Yeah, it's a massive sense of
loss in the same way that you know
hearing Alexi's voice just the voice um
brought tears to my eyes because that
was his death was also a severance of a
thread tying me to that place and so
many people have either left or died or
been killed. uh so many in beloved
institutions and places have closed that
um I think even if I were to go back now
it would be a totally alien place. So
yeah there is a massive sense of loss.
>> Is there any source of hope that you
have for Russia like even glimmers?
I mean, Russian culture, Russian humor
always find a way like water.
Um,
and nothing is forever,
but Russia certainly does have a
pattern. I imagine that this will lead
to
a period of thaw and liberalization
before another snapback and backlash.
That's just how Russia does things. So,
I'm hoping to at least catch that little
thaw in the future.
>> Judia Yi, thank you very much.
Congratulations on Motherland. Thank
[music] you so much for having me.